okay so the polls are way off this is
causing candidates to drift away from
the political Center this shift is in
turn a danger to democracy and I have
the lines on electoral maps to show it
though there is no need to panic yet let
me explain we have now had three
consecutive presidential elections where
the polls have systematically
underestimated support for Donald Trump
and therefore given a very bad
indication of where each election was
going now if you are like me your first
inclination is to either shake your head
at the posters or outright point and
laugh because sometimes absurdity is
comedy but dig a little deeper and this
is actually a serious problem you see
democracy as a system of governance has
some very nice features indeed ones that
comport with some lines on maps logic
wait you thought that this was going to
be a video about domestic American
politics well get comfortable because
the lines are a coming for Democratic
systems to have those nice features in
practice candidates need to know where
the voters stand on the issues and pole
workers doing their jobs properly is the
best way to make that happen lose
effective polling and candidates have
incentive to start drifting to the
extremes and then you start venturing
into a world where the whole Democratic
experiment goes belly up so yes it is
bad that posters are struggling to get
it right today you do not need me to
tell you that but the consequences of
that on the party's strategic decisions
are so much worse hold up I'm getting
ahead of myself let's start by talking
about how democracy is cool democracy
comes in many varieties so with
apologies to other countries we are
going to focus on the US rules here
given that this is a conversation about
a US
election by and large the United States
operates on a first past the post system
it is as simple as it gets you take a
look at all of the votes and whoever has
the most wins whether they receive a
majority of those votes is irrelevant a
plurality is all that is necessary this
decision rule naturally gives rise to a
two-party system it is one of the most
robust findings that political
scientists have discovered and it is a
perfectly logical thing to happen to see
what I mean imagine that you have three
candidates pulling at 45 35 and
20% well that third candidate is too far
away from winning to matter and her
supporters are not particularly excited
to have their votes not matter either
thus they naturally gravitate toward the
other two some going to the second place
candidate to try to get him over the
hump While others going to the first
place candidate to protect him from the
second place candidates
encroachment by and large voters
naturally understand this it is why
third-party candidates get so few votes
even in elections where the two primary
candidates are not particularly popular
there just are not very many voters out
there who want to cast their ballots
knowing that their candidates have no
shot nor are there that many voters who
are ignorant of what can happen in close
cases like Florida in the year 2000
repeat elections under these rules
enough times though and eventually you
will condense things to the point where
only two parties overall have success
and thus are the only ones capable of
maintaining the political infrastructure
necessary to run real
campaigns that further entrenches the
system now a third party needs both a
magically divined political
infrastructure and belief among voters
that they will not be spoiling their
vote you can get traces of that but it
is really hard to stick now as much as
people like to lament how the two
parties fail to speak to them when
things are working right this actually
does a good job of pleasing moderates in
a country and that is thanks to the
magic of the median voter theorem
political parties have two competing
incentives they want to change policy to
align with their preferences and they
also want to win these run into direct
conflict against one another but in a
vacuum the desire to win dominates let
me explain take a basic leftright
political Spectrum perhaps the
Democratic party most prefers a world
over here while the Republican Party
most prefers a world over here
nevertheless it might not be best to
field candidates with those specific
policy
platforms imagine that the electorate is
distributed like this to win office you
simply need more votes than the other
side getting them is easier said than
done though if both parties stick to
their actual preferences and nominate
candidates that match each party's
preferred platform the democrat's
platform is closer to this guy the
median voter so named because half of
the voter's ideal policies fall to the
left of her and half of the voters ideal
policies fall to the right of her as a
result the Democrat gets more votes and
wins the election thereby implementing
her policy here now if you are the
Republican party you really dislike this
outcome not only are you not in the
white house but remember that the
Democrats will implement this policy
Which is far away from your ideal Point
well clever Republicans can offer a
solution
rather than nominate someone matching
the party's ideal underlying preferences
Why not pick someone slightly more
moderate after all he is closer to the
median voter and therefore he has enough
popular support to win the
election yes by doing so you are not
getting everything that you want but you
are getting most of what you want and
that is certainly better than the
Democrats getting their way of course
the Democrats ought to be able to
anticipate this as well thus rather than
nominating someone at their own ideal
point they would want to undercut the
Republicans clever
strategy then again the Republicans can
further undercut that but then the
Democrats can undercut that basically
you can repeat that over and over again
until both end up overlapping right at
the median voters policy position see
right there in the middle that is the
median voter theorem for you both
parties must converge to the median
voters position lest the other party
undercut the first and indeed we used to
commonly see this in the United States
assuming that you are over the age of 16
or so how many presidential candidates
have you seen who immediately after the
primary season has ended tried to claim
that he was a moderate all
along well that is the media and voter
theorem at work and how many times
during primary seasons have you heard
candidates appeal to party voters that
they are the more electable candidate in
a general election and that primary
voters should choose them despite being
more moderate than the party's
position again that is the median voter
theorem at work of course that said
there are a bunch of reasons why you do
not get complete
convergence it is actually a gigantic
research agenda but to cover a few
explanations
plausible candidates might not exist
exactly at the median one party might
have a candidate that is generally
likable aside from political qualities
and will therefore draw enough support
despite not being as close to some
voters on policy
positions voters might not perfectly
identify where the candidates are on the
political Spectrum you might not be able
to cleanly map political preferences on
a single Dimension you might try to push
toward the end of your party in an
effort to Rally the base and win via a
larger turnout though I should note that
the evidence for this effect is scant
when extreme candidates just barely beat
moderates in house primaries the
associated party's vote share declines
between 9 to 13 points and the odds that
the candidate wins declines between 35
and 54 points and in expectation the
seats ideology becomes more favorable to
the other party the deck is stacked
against this because you need to get two
more people to turn out to vote for
every one moderate voter you could
otherwise persuade but there is one
possibility particularly pertinent to
the present political party imagine that
the parties do not actually know the
electorates distribution of political
ideology what now I ask that question
because it is a good way to to describe
the current world we live in today with
three consecutive presidential elections
featuring major polling
errors if you do a little bit of
research on why this is happening you
will get a variety of answers but what
is not going on here even if it is a
tempting conclusion to draw is that
pollsters systematically underestimate
Trump support by sheer inability to
learn from the
past sure it is an easy thought to have
when the aggregated polling averages
were Plus 3.9% for Clinton in
2016 Plus 88.4% for Biden in 2020 and
plus 1.2% for Harris in
2024 versus an actual plus 2.1 for
Clinton in
2016 Plus 4.5% for Biden in 2020 and
minus 2.4% is for Harris in
2024 that works out to an underestimate
of Trump by 1.8% in
2016 3.9% in 2020 and 3.6% is in
2024 with an asterisk on the last one
because some votes are still left
uncounted and they are primarily from
the Democratic leaning West Coast
regardless the reason that these
mistakes should be surprising is because
pollsters are actively trying to fix
their systems so they can get their
numbers right
let's rewind for a second pollsters
attempt to get a random sample of Voters
Because by the power of Statistics a
survey of just 1,000 people or so gives
you solid prediction power for the whole
population unfortunately some people do
not pick up the phone and thus those who
do respond may not be a representative
sample holsters have a clever way to
mitigate this problem though suppose
that the Poll finished with 600 women
responding well we know that the
population is only about
50.5% women the sample has therefore
over represented that group The Fix
reduce their weight for the final
estimate and expand the weight of
everyone else to match the known
population or as you are collecting the
survey data stop sampling women
altogether once you have received 505 of
their responses
aggregate a whole bunch of these surveys
together and you should have a very good
guess of who is going to
win unfortunately this only works when
you know the demographic data that
matters for vote
Choice let's use the 2016 election to
illustrate the problem in practice
pollsters new to way survey data on Race
minorities for example historically
break much harder for the
Democrats what posters did not realize
in 2016 however was that the combination
of race and college education mattered
let's break this down 30% of Voters were
college educated whites 44% of Voters
were non-college educated whites 38% of
the former group voted for Trump but 64%
of the latter group chose him the 2016
polls merged these groups together and
not realizing the issue talked to way
more whites with college degrees than
they should have so problem solved for
2020 just Way by college education next
time and you'll be good to go or not
2020 was somehow worse a fact that is
easily forgotten because Biden won by a
wide margin anyway worse yet no one was
really sure what happened in 2020 to
skew the polls so there was no obvious
fix for
2024 now to be clear differences like
these are not incredibly uncommon by
historical
standards going backward Obama was
actually plus 3.5 in
2012 2018 pretty much nailed it actually
Bush was plus 0.8 in 2004 another good
year but Gore was plus 4.1 in 2000 and
Dole was plus 4.3 in
1996 you know if you go back further you
can actually find bigger
mistakes what makes our present
situation weird though is that it is
occurring at a time when elections
simultaneously feel close and the
candidates seem like they are operating
on two completely different theories
about the American electorate and that
is a problem so the polls cannot
precisely capture what the American
electorate wants but how does that
affect what candidates actually do and I
want to note that this is the important
question yes the uncertainty also
creates more dramatic tension on
Election night when we are not exactly
sure what is going to happen but the
popcorn experience is as delicious as it
is fleeting the thing that matters in
the long run is what candidates do once
elected and it turns out that this
uncertainty has an under appreciated
consequence let's go back to the median
voter parties Converge on him because
they know where he is but what if they
do not what if each of these guys
represented a possible median each with
some chance of being the true one
actually to keep things simple suppose
that there are just three possible
medians one still in the political
Center at a relatively unlikely chance
of 20% and two possible polarized
medians each at
40% even though this guy is the median
of the possible medians it does not make
sense for the parties to converge on him
if they care a lot about the policy
being
implemented consider the Republicans
perspective if the Democrats Place their
candidate in the middle and the
Republicans match it as usual then the
policy outcome is guaranteed to land
there which is far away from the party's
preferred position in contrast think
about what happens if the Republican
candidate drifts to the right the
Democrats will win 60% of the time now
but they are still implementing a
moderate policy no big deal for the
Republicans indeed the Republicans still
win 40% of the time thanks to this guy
and when they do they are much happier
with the policy implemented in fact
maybe they will try placing their
candidate all the way out here and
maximize their policy outcome
conditional on that because this guy
still prefers them but it gets worse for
political moderation with the Republican
candidate now all the way out here
Democrats can drift to the left maintain
their 60% chance of winning because they
remain closest to these two
possibilities and get a more favorable
policy outcome given Victory note that
this incentive gets worse as the parties
become more clueless about the median
voters preference with platforms able to
drift further away as the bandwidth also
drifts and this feels like what we have
experienced lately especially in
2024 Trump easily won his primary while
being fixated on a populist platform
despite obvious concerns that he has
turned off the traditional core of the
Republican party and the Democratic
party defaulting on Harris succeeding
Biden and on a platform that duplicated
bidens despite obvious concerns that
Americans were unhappy with the status
quo the candidate drift by itself may
seem bad to you but it can get a lot
worse in the
extreme democracy is the worst form of
government except all other forms of
government which are somehow worse than
the worst but let's talk for a moment
about why democracy is more attractive
than the
Alternatives now if if you grew up in a
western country you probably got the
fluffy democracy is good because it
implements the will of the people and
sure that is nice and all but let me
give you a more practical reason why
democracy is cool the World Bank likes
to describe Civil War as development in
Reverse an idea that has had a major
impact basically you spend all of your
time destroying infrastructure rather
than investing in it and that is not
good if you like money so if you want to
get poor start a civil war if you never
want the wealth to cease then keep the
peace well what prevents Civil Wars from
happening is maintaining the alignment
of the distribution of policy benefits
and the balance of coercive power in
most democracies not all but most the
balance of corve power is in the hands
of the majority of the people
and what do elections do ensure that the
policies implemented are in line with
the majority preferences especially when
both sides try to moderate their
policies to win over the median voter
elections further communicate
information to everyone that the losing
policy is unpopular and trying to
initiate a civil conflict to overturn
the results will be an uphill
battle given that losing parties tend
not to trust TR fomenting a revolution
not when they can just run again in a
few years when the next election is
scheduled now this Democratic civil
peace does not universally work for
example part of the problem with post
Saddam Iraq was that the Sunni minority
simultaneously had all of the guns left
over from the Saddam era and knew that
elections would not be favorable for
them but by and large an established
democrac acies this is not a problem it
leads to domestic stability Economic
Development and long-term wealth
generation it is pretty great that said
do you see the problem that an unknown
median voter can cause with the
bargaining
logic when candidates start drifting
away from the center it does two things
first even if the party's position is
close to the true median the gap between
the imposed and the alternative policies
widens
that gives losers more incentive to try
to resist the outcome of an
election second it is possible that the
winning party just got lucky the true
median was actually in the middle but
the other party just went even further
out now you have an unpopular leader and
a large majority of the population
looking for
change as a result bad polling is not
just an annoyance of modern American
politics where election outcomes to The
Observer look like nothing more than a
coin flip in the extreme case it is a
danger to democracy more generally the
good news here is that any indications
of immediate Doom and Gloom are
overstated for now what we are most
likely observing is a trump induced
change in the party system Democrats
previously pulled their support from
minorities and workingclass whites
meanwhile the Republican party was
wealthy and wher but college educated
people started drifting Democrat via
social policy which then distorted the
party's economic policy through trade
liberalization that in turn hurt
workingclass voters Trump spoke to them
for the first time in a long time
concluding the huge shift in support
bases this would not be the first time
that the parties have seen some strange
switches for example it was not too long
ago that the Democratic basee came from
the South not the west and the
Northeast what we may be seeing is
pollsters being slow to capture the
Nuance of the new system especially as
it relates to Trump notably the 2018 and
2022 midterm elections did not have the
same sort of
inaccuracies if so things will get
better over time and the parties will
begin to converge policy closer to
wherever the New Media is what will be a
real problem is if somehow pollsters get
even worse perhaps because they now are
not sure what to do in a post-trump
world and polarization of party
preferences encourages them to adopt far
out policies hoping that the median
voter will support them it will keep me
busy with some lines on ideology but it
probably will not be the best thing for
the country well that's it for me today
let me just take a quick look at the
headlines and make sure I didn't miss
anything Israel hit secret Iranian
nuclear research facility during October
operation well I guess I know what we're
doing in the next video uh until then if
you enjoyed this one like share and
subscribe and I'll see you next time
take care goodbye